THIS BOOK SHOULD GO TO WORCESTER

King Alfred greets bishop Wærferth with loving and friendly words.

I want you to know that it has very often come to my mind what wise men there used to be throughout England, both in the sacred and secular orders, and how happy the times were back then throughout England; how the kings who had authority over the people in those days obeyed God and his messengers, and they maintained peace, morality and order at home and the same time grew their territory abroad; how they succeeded both in war and in wisdom, and also how eager the sacred orders were about both teaching and learning, and about all the services they should perform for God; how men from abroad came to this land seeking wisdom and instruction, and how we now have to get them from abroad if we want them.

So complete was the decay in England that there were very few this side of the Humber who could understand their own rituals in English, or could even translate a letter from Latin into English, and I believe there weren’t many that could beyond the Humber either! There were so few of them that I can’t even think of a single one south of the Thames when I took the throne. Thanks be to God Almighty that we have any supply of teachers at all now!

Therefore I command you to do what I already believe you are wanting to do: free yourself from worldly affairs as often as you can so that whenever you can establish your God-given wisdom, you do so. Think about what punishments would come on us on account of this world if we neither loved wisdom nor left it for other men. We’d love only the name “Christian” and very few of the virtues!

When I remembered of all this, I also remembered how I saw—before it was ravaged and burnt—how the churches throughout England stood filled with treasures and books. There were also many servants of God, but they got very little benefit from the books. They couldn’t understand anything in them because they weren’t written in their own language. It’s as if they’d said: “Our elders, who used to hold these places, loved wisdom and, through it, they obtained wealth and left it to us. We can still see their footprints but we can’t follow after them.”

When I remembered all of this, I really wondered why the good and wise men who used to be throughout England, who had learned all the books perfectly, wouldn’t have translated any them into their own language. But I soon answered myself: they didn’t ever think men would be become so careless and learning decay so much. They deliberately didn’t translate. They expected that the wisdom in this land would increase because we would know more languages.

Then I remembered how the law was devised earliest in Hebrew, and afterwards, when the Greeks learned it, they translated it all into their own language along with all the other books.  And then the Romans, in the same way, when they had learned them, translated them all, through wise interpreters, into their own language. And all the other Christian nations translated some of them into their own languages.

Therefore it seems better to me, if it does to you, if we also translate some books—those which are the most useful for all men to know—into the language that we can all understand, and that we accomplish this—as we very easily can with God’s help if we’re peaceful—so that all the young amongst the free men now in England, who have the means to devote themselves to it, be set to learning—while they aren’t useful for any other occupation—until they are able to read English well. One may afterwards teach Latin to those one wishes to teach further and to promote to a higher rank.

When I remembered how the knowledge of Latin had previously decayed throughout England and yet how many could read English, I began—while dealing with other various cares of this kingdom—to translate into English the book that, in Latin, is called “Pastoralis” and, in English, the “Shepherd’s Book”—sometimes word for word and sometimes the sense from the sense, just as I had learned it from Plugmund my archbishop, and Asser my bishop and from Grimbold my mass-priest and John my mass-priest.. And when I had learned it, understood it, and could most intelligently translate it, I rendered it into English. And I will send a copy to every bishopric in my kingdom, and in each will be a æstel worth fifty mancuses.

And I command in the name of God that no man may take the æstel from the book or the book from the monastery. It’s unclear for how long there’ll be such learned bishops as now, thanks to God, there are nearly everywhere. Therefore I want the books to always remain in their place, unless the bishop wishes to take the book with him or they are lent out somewhere, or if someone is copying it.