INTRODUCTION.

In the prefatory portion, preceding the first canto of Beowulf, we are presented with the genealogy of the Danish king Hrothgar, beginning with Scef (Sceaf), and terminating with a prince named, like the hero of the poem, Beowulf. Now as this Beowulf the Scylding is, no doubt, to be considered identical with the Beaw who figures in the genealogies as an ancestor of Woden, there is a vast chasm to be filled up between him and Healfdene, the father of Hrothgar, the reigning prince at the time of the poem; although, judging from the text, it would seem that the line from Scef to Hrothgar was unbroken throughout. But it may be right to observe, that the words (l. 112) “oðþæt him eft onwóc heáh Healfdene” do not necessarily imply any such uninterrupted line, but simply that, in course of time, not immediately, there sprang from him (Scef) “the lofty Healfdene.” To have given all the intermediate links of the pedigree would have been tedious and, therefore, unpoetical, and the poem of Beowulf is neither. This preface closes with the death of Scyld, and an account of his being laid in a ship, with his arms and treasures, and committed to the winds and waves, in manner like to that in which he had, in his infancy, been sent to the Danish shore.

Canto I. Healfdene had four sons, viz. Heorogar, Hrothgar, Halga, and Ela. Hrothgar succeeds his brother Heorogar. This prince causes a splendid royal residence to be constructed, to which he gives the name of Heorot or Heort. This is soon made a scene of slaughter, in consequence of the nightly attacks of a fiendish being called Grendel, II., who carries off at one time no less than thirty thanes, for the purpose of devouring them in his retreat. These dreadful visitations are continued during a period of twelve years. III. Intelligence of this calamity having reached Beowulf, a nephew of Hygelac, king of the opposite territory of West Gothland, he resolves to rid the Danish land of the monster, and, in pursuance of this design, sails from home with a company of fifteen warriors. On reaching Hrothgar’s realm, he is challenged by the officer stationed at the extreme point of the land to give notice of the approach of enemies. IV. V. VI. After a parley, Beowulf and his companions are conducted to King Hrothgar, to whom he relates the object of his voyage, and meets with a welcome reception. VII. Hrothgar recapitulates all that he has suffered from Grendel, and all sit down to feast and drink. VIII. During their potation, Beowulf is taunted by a quarrelsome, envious courtier, named Hunferth, on the subject of a swimming match between the Gothic warrior and Breca, prince of the Brondings; but is effectually answered by Beowulf, who relates the perils he underwent at the bottom of the sea, in his encounters with the nickers. IX. Beowulf continues his narrative. Wealhtheow, Hrothgar’s queen, is then introduced presenting the mead-cup to the guests, who at length with her consort retires to rest, leaving Beowulf and his companions in the hall. X. While the other warriors are sleeping, Beowulf awaits the coming of Grendel. XI. Immediately on entering the hall, Grendel seizes a sleeping warrior, whom he devours. A conflict then ensues between him and Beowulf, XII., whose companions come to his aid, but find that the monster’s carcase is proof against their weapons; but Beowulf, grasping him, tears his arm from his shoulder, and the monster, thus mutilated, escapes to his fen-habitation. XIII. All the people are eager to behold the hand and arm of Grendel; the praises of Beowulf are sung, while a king’s thane tells of the exploits of Sigemund Wælsing and his son Fitela; horse-racing succeeds. XIV. Hrothgar visits Heorot and sees Grendel’s hand, and is loud in Beowulf’s praise. XV. Heorot is restored to its former splendour; a great feast is held, at which Beowulf and his companions are munificently rewarded for their services. XVI. A gleeman sings the story of the Frisian king, Fin Folcwalding, of Hnæf and Hengest, and Hildeburh and her sons. XVII. The lay being finished, Wealhtheow presents the cup to her consort, and commends her sons, Hrethric and Hrothmund, to the protection of Hrothwulf. XVIII. Beowulf is presented with a rich dress and a collar of gold, which the poet compares with the celebrated collar of the Brosings, that was carried off by Hama, and afterwards came into the possession of the Gothic king Hermanric. This collar became afterwards the property of Hygelac, at whose death in Friesland it fell into the hands of the Franks. The warriors then betake themselves to rest. While they are sleeping, Grendel’s mother, bent on vengeance for her son, enters the hall ; but the warriors being roused, she hastens away, taking with her in her flight an old friend and counsellor of Hrothgar, named Æschere. Beowulf, who had slept in another place, is thereupon summoned to attend Hrothgar, XX., who relates to him the calamity that had befallen them, and gives a highly poetic description of the place around Grendel’s abode, promising at the same time great rewards to Beowulf, if he will achieve the adventure of seeking and, of course, destroying Grendel and his mother in their habitation. XXI. Beowulf undertakes the adventure, and, accompanied by Hrothgar and their followers, sets out on an exploring expedition. The description of the tracts they traverse is very picturesque. On their way they find Æschere’s head lying on the bank of the lake. A vivid picture of the terrible lake and its monstrous inhabitants is then given. Beowulf prepares for his descent, armed with a celebrated sword named Hrunting, lent to him by Hunferth. XXII. XXIII. Having recommended his followers to the protection of Hrothgar, he plunges into the water, which was so deep that a day had passed ere he reached the bottom. Here he encounters Grendel’s mother. The particulars of their conflict need not be repeated, being so fully given in the poem itself. XXIV. Beowulf relates his adventure to Hrothgar, and presents to him the hilt of the sword with which he had slain the mother of Grendel, the blade of which had been melted by her hot, venomous blood. Hrunting had failed him in the contest. XXV. This canto is chiefly occupied by Hrothgar’s exhortations to Beowulf. XXVI. Hrothgar and Beowulf take leave of each other, and Beowulf with his presents embarks. XXVII. He sets sail and arrives at the residence of Hygelac on the seacoast. Here follows a short and obscure notice of Hygd, the daughter of Hæreth, and queen of Hygelac, who, after her consort’s death, became the wife of Offa, son of Garmund, king of Angeln. XXVIII. Beowulf finds a welcome reception from Hygelac, to whom he relates his exploits at Heorot, and tells how Wealhtheow, Hrothgar’s queen, distributed bracelets to the warriors present, while Freaware, her daughter, who was betrothed to the son of Froda, presented the ale-cup. Here follows an allusion to a war with, and the subjugation of, the Heathobards, and the fall of their prince, Withergyld, together with some obscure matter uttered by Beowulf relating to the same subject and to Ingeld; after which he resumes his narrative about his conflict with Grendel, and Æschere, and Grendel’s mother, XXXI. and the further rewards bestowed on him by Hrothgar, a portion of which he presents to Hygelac and Hygd, and receives in return from Hygelac a precious sword, that had belonged to Hrethel. An allusion follows to subsequent events, viz., the fall of Hygelac and Heardred (who is called the nephew of Hereric), and to the accession of Beowulf to the throne. Then follows an account of a dragon that infested the neighbourhood of Beowulf’s residence brooding over a treasure hidden in a mound, that had been there deposited by some prince in by-gone days. XXXII. This entire canto is devoted to the treasure, its owners, and the dragon, and is very obscure. XXXIII. The dragon begins to vomit forth glowing embers, and destroys Beowulf’s residence, who thereupon resolves to go out against him and destroy him. Further allusion is here made to the death of Hygelac in Friesland, whence Beowulf, who had accompanied him, escaped by swimming. On his return home, Hygd offers him the throne, to the prejudice of her son Heardred, who, on account of his tender age, appeared unequal to the task of withstanding the foes of his country. But Beowulf nobly rejects the proffered boon, and is satisfied, with being the friend and guardian of Heardred. This prince, it appears, was slain in a battle with some pirates, who had previously overcome the son of Ohthere, the son of Ongentheow, king of the Swedes. After the death of Heardred, Beowulf ascends the vacant throne. XXXIV. Here allusion is made to Beowulf’s friendship for Eadgils, the son of Ohthere, whom it seems he aided with men and money for the recovery of his kingdom. Beowulf now goes with his followers to reconnoitre the dragon’s haunt. Here the aged king sits and relates the sad story of the accidental death of Herebeald, the eldest of Hrethel’s sons, by the hand of his brother Hæthcyn, XXXV. and continues his narrative with the account of a war between the Swedes and Goths, after the death of Hrethel, the Swedes having, it seems, laid siege to Hreosna-beorh, the residence apparently of the Gothic kings. In this war Hæthcyn was slain, and Ongentheow also fell by the hand of Eofer. Beowulf then recounts his battles with the Hugas, and the death by his hand of their leader, named Dæghrefn. After a short farewell greeting, he prepares for a conflict with the dragon. The combat is then described, in which Beowulf is reduced to great straits, XXXVI. when a young warrior, a kinsman of Beowulf, named Wiglaf, resolves to aid him. An account of Wiglaf s sword affords the poet an opportunity of a digression (not very intelligible) concerning Weohstan, the father of Wiglaf, and his battles with Eanmund, a son of Ohthere. Wiglaf then summons to follow him, to his prince’s succour, those warriors who had accompanied them. The fight continues, Beowulf’s sword, Nægling, snaps asunder, and the dragon clutches the aged warrior in his talons. XXXVII. Wiglaf having wounded the monster, Beowulf draws his knife (seax), which he wore on his coat of mail, and cuts the dragon through the middle. Beowulf is then sensible that his death is at hand, caused by the venom. Sitting on a stone, he commands Wiglaf to go and bring the treasure from the cave, that, having looked on it, he may die the more tranquilly. XXXVIII. Wiglaf visits the mound, the treasure he there sees is described. On his return he finds his master at the point of death, who, while giving directions for his funeral and mound on Hrones-næs, expires. XXXIX. The men, who had retired to the wood (l. 5185), now come forth, and are bitterly reproached by Wiglaf. XL. Wiglaf sends a messenger to the warriors who were awaiting the event on the promontory (l. 5051), who announces to them the death of the king, and its probable consequences, namely a war with the Franks and Frisians. He repeats the account of the war with the Swedes and the fall of Hæthcyn (ll. 4935 sqq.), part of which is very obscure. XLI. Ongentheow’s last battle with Hygelac and fall are described. The messenger concludes by exhorting them to prepare a funeral pile. XLII. XLIII. The remainder is devoted to the funeral of Beowulf.
